About appledoc
==============

appledoc is command line tool that helps Objective-C developers generate Apple-like source code documentation from specially formatted source code comments. It's designed to take as readable source code comments as possible for the input and use comments as well as surrounding source code to generate visually appealing documentation in the form of HTML as well as fully indexed and browsable Xcode documentation set. Although there are several tools that can create HTML documentation for Objective-C, all of those know to me fall short in meeting the minimum of goals described below.

Main goals of appledoc:

- Human-readable source code comments.
- Simple cross references to objects and members.
- Generate Apple-like source code HTML documentation.
- Generate and install fully indexed and browsable Xcode documentation set.
- Single tool to drive generation from source code parsing to documentation set installation.
- Easily customizable output.
- 100% Objective-C implementation for easy debugging.

To make your experience with appledoc as smooth as possible, we warmly suggest reading this whole document as well as all online documentation mentioned in "using appledoc" section below!

Usage of appledoc is allowed under the terms listed in LICENSE section at the bottom of this file!

Want to keep updated? Follow us on Twitter - [@gentlebytes](http://twitter.com/gentlebytes).


Using appledoc
--------------

This is experimental branch. It's focus is on [bringing appledoc to next level](http://gentlebytes.com/2012/02/bringing-appledoc-to-next-level). As such it's in development so it doesn't (yet) provide all functionality from master branch. However you're encouraged to give it a go so we can receive early feedback!

Current focus: **source code parser**

Command line usage for various tasks:

- Testing source code parser:

		appledoc -p MyProject -v 1.0 -c MyCompany -u com.mycompany -v 4 --log-format=0 --log-common=0 --log-parsing=1 <path(s)>
	
	This will only log parser tokens so you can test if it "understands" everything from your source files.

- Use `appledoc --help` for help, or add `--print-settings` switch to see all the values used on the current run session (for simpler debugging).

For questions and feedback on experimental branch, use [Google groups forum](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/appledoc).

appledoc requires Xcode 4 or greater for compiling and OS X 10.7 for running!


LICENSE
=======

appledoc is licensed with modified BSD license requiring attribution. In plain language: you're allowed to do whatever you wish with the code, modify, redistribute, embed in your products (free or commercial), but you must include copyright, terms of usage and disclaimer as stated in the license, the same way as any other BSD licensed code. You can of course use documentation generated by appledoc for your products (free or commercial), but you must attribute appledoc either in documentation itself or other appropriate place such as your website.

If for whatever reason you cannot agree to these terms, contact us through contact form on [our about page](http://gentlebytes.com/contact), we'll do our best to help you out you out and find a workable solution!


Copyright (c) 2009-2012, Tomaz Kragelj
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source, binary forms and generated documentation, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

- Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

- Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

- Redistributions of documentation generated by appledoc must include attribution to appledoc, either in documentation itself or other appropriate media.

- Neither the name of the appledoc, Gentle Bytes nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Gentle Bytes appledoc@gentlebytes.com